eneral Instructions 
Read the following instructions very carefully and follow them:  
i. 
ii. 
This question paper has 13 questions. All questions are compulsory.   
This question paper contains three sections: 
Section A: Reading Skills,  
Section B: Creative Writing Skills  
Section C: Literature.   
Maximum Marks: 80 
iii. Attempt all questions based on specific instructions for each part. Write the correct question 
number and part thereof in your answer sheet.    
iv. Separate instructions are given with each question/part, wherever necessary.   
v. Adhere to the prescribed word limit while answering the questions. 
SECTION A 
READING SKILLS                                               
1. Read the following passages. 
(22 marks) 
12 
Ours was the marsh country, down by the river, within twenty miles of the sea. My first most vivid 
and broad impression of the identity of things seems to me to have been gained on a memorable 
raw afternoon towards evening. The low leaden line beyond was the river; and that the distant 
savage lair from which the wind was rushing was the sea; and that the small bundle of shivers 
growing afraid of it all and beginning to cry, was Pip.  
“Hold your noise!” cried a terrible voice, as a man started up from among the graves at the side of 
the bushes. “Keep still, or I’ll make you pay!” 
A fearful man, all in coarse grey, with a great iron on his leg. A man with no hat, and with broken 
shoes, and with an old rag tied round his head. A man who had been soaked in water, and 
smothered in mud, limped, and shivered, and glared, and growled; and whose teeth chattered in 
his head as he seized me. 
“Tell us your name!” said the man. “Quick! Give it mouth!” 
“Pip. Pip, sir.” 
“Show us where you live,” said the man. “Point out the place!” 
The man, after looking at me for a moment, emptied my pockets. There was nothing in them but a 
piece of bread which he ate ravenously. 
1 
Please note that the assessment scheme of the Academic Session 2024-25 will continue 
in the current session i.e. 2025-26 
“Now lookee here!” said the man. “Where’s your mother?” 
“There, sir!” said I. 
He started, made a short run, and stopped and looked over his shoulder. 
“Oh!” said he, coming back. Who’s that?” he asked, pointing. 
“My sister, sir, —Mrs. Joe Gargery, —wife of Joe Gargery, the blacksmith, sir.” 
“Blacksmith, eh?” said he. And looked down at his leg. 
After darkly looking at his leg, he came close to me, took me by both arms, and tilted me back as 
far as he could hold me; so that his eyes looked most powerfully down into mine, and mine looked 
most helplessly up into his. 
“Now lookee here,” he said, “You know what a file and wittles is?” 
“Yes, sir.” 
After each question he tilted me over a little more, so as to give me a greater sense of helplessness 
and danger. 
“You get me a file.” He tilted me again. “And wittles.” He tilted me again. “You bring ’em both to me.”  
I was dreadfully frightened, and so giddy that I clung to him with both hands, and said, “If you would 
kindly please to let me keep upright, sir, perhaps I shouldn’t be sick, and perhaps I could attend 
more.” 
He did. Then, he held me by the arms, in an upright position, and went on with his terms.  
Source: Great Expectations by Charles Dickens / 448 words  
Answer the following questions, based on the passage above. 
I 
II 
III 
IV 
Which textual evidence tells us that Pip was trembling? 
Complete the following with a suitable reason.  
The writer refers to the sea as a ‘savage lair’ in order to tell the reader that  ____. 
The writer emphasises Pip’s vulnerability in all of the following ways EXCEPT — 
A. through the description of the harsh landscape 
B. via the behaviour of the frightening man 
C. through Pip’s helplessness and fear 
D. via Pip’s knowledge of the surrounding area 
What type of statement is made in the phrase "Keep still, or I’ll make you pay!"? 
A. caution 
B. threat 
C. prediction 
D. announcement 
2 
Please note that the assessment scheme of the Academic Session 2024-25 will continue 
in the current session i.e. 2025-26 
1  
1 
1 
1  
1  
V Based on his initial appearance, how can we say that the ‘fearful man’ was in a state 
of discomfort? (Any one reason) 
VI. Which one of the following statements best explains the phrase "Give it mouth!"? 
A) Speak loudly               
B) Open your mouth wide              
VII. 
C) Answer the question 
The man ate the bread 'ravenously'. What does this suggest about his condition?      
VIII What does the man’s question, “Where’s your mother?” and his reaction when Pip 
points to her suggest about his intentions? (Answer in about 40 words) 
IX 
How does the man’s action of forcing Pip to look up at him contribute to the tension 
in the scene? (Answer in about 40 words) 
X Complete the following with the most suitable option. 
The main idea of the text is ______. 
A. Pip's encounter with a frightening man who demands information 
B. the harshness of Pip's environment and the fear it creates 
C. Pip's struggle to understand the man’s intentions and stay calm 
D. the importance of family relationships in Pip’s life 
2. 
Read the following carefully. 
1 
1 
2  
2 
1  
10 
1 A recent survey was conducted among 2,000 college students and young professionals to 
analyse preferences for different types of jobs, including corporate roles, personal start-ups 
or family businesses, and service professions (example - defense, nursing, police). The 
study aimed to identify trends in career aspirations, the factors influencing these 
preferences, and their implications for workforce planning and education systems. 
Participants were asked to rank their preferences on a five-point scale.  
2 The study covered respondents across urban and semi-urban areas, representing diverse 
educational, economic, and cultural backgrounds. Researchers ensured diversity in gender, 
socioeconomic status, and career stages to make the findings representative of a broad 
spectrum of opinions. Data collection involved online questionnaires and in-person 
interviews, ensuring a comprehensive understanding of job preferences. The data was 
displayed as a bar graph given below. 
3 
Please note that the assessment scheme of the Academic Session 2024-25 will continue 
in the current session i.e. 2025-26 
3 Corporate jobs were commonly associated with financial stability, growth opportunities, and 
access to structured career paths. Start-ups and family businesses, on the other hand, 
appealed to those valuing autonomy, creativity, and the chance to work in more flexible 
environments. Service professions were perceived as fulfilling and prestigious, especially 
among individuals motivated by a sense of duty. 
4 The survey also highlighted several challenges. Geographic variations were significant, with 
urban respondents gravitating more toward corporate roles, while semi-urban participants 
showed a stronger inclination for service professions and family businesses. Respondents 
indicated limited mentorship opportunities and a lack of clarity about the long-term prospects 
of non-corporate careers as barriers influencing their decisions. 
5 The findings provide a foundation for further research into how cultural, regional, and 
generational influences shape career choices. Future studies could explore factors such as 
gender-based preferences, emerging industries, mentorship availability, and the role of 
technological advancements in shaping job markets. Additionally, longitudinal research could 
track how these preferences evolve as respondents advance in their careers. This could 
help educational institutions and employers develop tailored strategies to better align with 
the aspirations and values of young job seekers. Moreover, policies encouraging skill 
development and mentorship programmes may bridge the gaps identified in this survey, 
ensuring more informed career decisions among youth. 
Created for academic usage / 348 words                                                   
10  
4 
Please note that the assessment scheme of the Academic Session 2024-25 will continue 
in the current session i.e. 2025-26 
Answer the following questions, based on the given passage. 
1  
I. 
II. 
III. 
What was the main purpose of the survey conducted among 2,000 college students 
and young professionals? 
A. To determine the popularity of specific jobs in rural areas versus urban areas 
B. To explore patterns in career aspirations and the factors influencing them 
C. To analyse the success rate of startups and family businesses 
D. To assess the salary expectations of young professionals opting for jobs 
Fill in the blank with the correct option from those given in brackets. 
The study ensured diversity in gender, socioeconomic status, and career stages to 
make the findings ________ (accurate / representative / specific). 
Fill in the blank with reference to the given bar graph chart. 
The profession preference for which policymakers primarily need to provide 
encouraging incentives is ____. 
For the Visually Impaired Candidates 
Complete the following suitably. 
When the researcher uses the phrase ‘a broad spectrum of opinions’ in the line ‘to 
make the findings representative of a broad spectrum of opinions’, the researcher 
refers to ____.                                                                            
(Ref: Paragraph 2) 
IV. Based on the bar graph, which of the following statements best reflects the correct 
trend in job preferences? 
A. Corporate jobs are more in the ‘Least preferred’ category than service 
professions. 
B. Service professions are less preferred than corporate jobs on the ‘Neutral’ 
scale. 
C. Service professions have a higher percentage of respondents marking them as 
‘Highly Preferred’ compared to corporate jobs. 
D. Corporate jobs and service professions have an equal percentage of 
respondents marking them as ‘Preferred.’ 
For the Visually Impaired Candidates 
Why does the researcher associate start-ups and family businesses with individuals 
who value autonomy?                                                                   
 (Ref: Paragraph 3) 
A. They allow individuals to independently make decisions and innovate. 
B. They guarantee long-term financial security and growth. 
C. They require minimal risk-taking and provide fixed schedules. 
D. They are managed by corporate guidelines ensuring stability.  
5 
Please note that the assessment scheme of the Academic Session 2024-25 will continue 
in the current session i.e. 2025-26 
1 
1  
1 
2 
V. Riya wishes to have a regular salary and defined growth in her career. Why is a 
corporate job better suited for her compared to joining a start-up or family business? 
(Ref: Paragraphs 3 & 4) 
VI. When the researcher says ‘Respondents indicated limited mentorship opportunities,’ 
what does s/he mean by ‘limited mentorship opportunities’? 
A. Lack of financial resources to hire mentors for jobs 
B. Absence of training programmes in semi-urban areas 
C. Reluctance of respondents to seek career advice from unknown people 
D. Difficulty in finding experienced professionals to guide career paths 
(Ref: Paragraph 4) 
VII. How might further studies in the understanding of emerging industries and 
technological advancements empower youth to make well-informed career 
decisions?                                                                                        
(Ref: Paragraph 5) 
VIII Select the option that is NOT addressed in this study. 
A. The purpose of the survey           
B. The impact of gender on career preferences 
C. Regional and demographic variations in preferences 
D. Challenges faced by respondents       
E. The methodology used for data collection 
SECTION B 
CREATIVE WRITING SKILLS (18 marks) 
All the names and addresses used in the questions are fictitious. Resemblance, if any, is 
purely coincidental. 
3. 
Attempt any one of the two, (A) or (B), in about 50 words 
1  
2 
1  
1x4=4  
A. You are Daljeet Kaur, a member of the Teen Well-Being Association, Chandigarh. The 
Association is planning to organise free pottery classes every Sunday morning at the 
community hall to encourage creativity among young residents. Write a notice in about 50 
words, informing the residents of the event and inviting registrations. Include all the 
necessary details. Put your notice in a box. 
OR 
B. You are Keerthi, the Secretary of the Environmental Club of ABC School, Madurai. Your 
school is organising an 'Eco-Fiesta' to raise awareness about environmental issues. Draft a 
notice in about 50 words, inviting students to participate in various activities and setting up of 
food stalls. Include all the necessary details. Put your notice in a box. 
6 
Please note that the assessment scheme of the Academic Session 2024-25 will continue 
in the current session i.e. 2025-26 
4. 
Attempt any one of the two, (A) or (B), in about 50 words. 
1x4=4 
A. As the Cultural Secretary, Vignesh Kumar, of JKL School, Jamshedpur, draft an invitation for 
the Annual Music Festival, inviting Gajendra Hansda, an acclaimed local musician, to 
perform and judge the event. Provide the essential details in about 50 words. 
OR 
B. You are Bina Bedekar, currently residing at 45, Ashok Vihar, Nagpur. You have been invited 
to inaugurate a science exhibition at your alma mater, National Public School, Mumbai. Write 
a formal reply in about 50 words, accepting the invitation and expressing your gratitude. 
5. 
Attempt any one of the two, (A) or (B), in 120-150 words 
1x5=5  
A. You are Pranab Chauhan, residing at 13-A, Gol Bazaar, Jaisalmer. Write a letter to the 
editor of The Nation Today, highlighting the need to assess sports talent at a young age by 
sports teachers and coaches to ensure that talent does not go unrecognised. Emphasise the 
importance of grooming young sportspersons to create a larger pool of talented athletes for 
the future. Draft the letter using your own ideas as well as the cues given. 
 Spotting natural abilities during formative years. 
 Building foundational skills early for long-term success. 
 Instilling discipline, teamwork, and sportsmanship from a young age. 
 Creating a larger pool of skilled athletes for the future. 
 Building a strong sports culture and national pride. 
OR 
B. You are Lakshmi Kapur from 51/A, second floor, Shalimar Vihar, Delhi. You have come 
across the following advertisement in The Urban Echo for the post of a Junior Marketing 
Executive at a leading marketing firm. Write a letter expressing your interest in the position. 
Include your bio-data along with the application. 
7 
1x5=5  
Please note that the assessment scheme of the Academic Session 2024-25 will continue 
in the current session i.e. 2025-26 
8 
Please note that the assessment scheme of the Academic Session 2024-25 will continue 
in the current session i.e. 2025-26 
 
6. Attempt any one of the two, (A) or (B), in 120-150 words 
A. Digital communication tools have revolutionised the educational landscape. The introduction 
of online learning platforms, virtual classrooms, and interactive tools has made education 
more accessible and engaging. You are Nooran Sheikh. Write an article for the monthly 
magazine edition of The Progressive Educator and discuss the role of digital communication 
in education. Write the article using your own ideas as well as the cues given. 
 Student engagement 
 Accessibility of education 
 Teachers and students' roles 
 Learning outcomes 
 OR 
B.  The cultural festival in LMN School, Kochi, was held recently to celebrate the school's 
achievements. As the senior editorial board member, Devaki Fernandes, write this report for 
the school magazine detailing various aspects of the festival. Write the report using your own 
ideas as well as the cues given. 
 Organisation and significance 
 Performances and exhibition  
 Participant engagement  
 Overall success.  
 
SECTION C 
                                                        LITERATURE                                                     (40 marks) 
   
7. Read the following extracts and solve ANY ONE of the given two, (A) or (B). 
                                    
1x6=6 
A  … I saw my mother, 
 beside me,  
 doze, open mouthed, her face 
 ashen like that  
 of a corpse and realised with  
 pain  
 that she was as old as she  
 looked but soon 
 put that thought away, and  
 looked out at Young Trees sprinting, the merry children spilling 
 out of their homes… 
(My Mother at Sixty-six) 
I. What does the imagery of the ‘ashen face’ of the mother suggest about her physical 
condition? 
1  
II. Complete the following with the correct option. 
 
The speaker’s use of the word 'realised' suggests that her awareness was _______ 
(delayed / expected / sudden). 
1  
 
How does the phrase ‘merry children spilling out of their homes’ contribute to the 
1  
III. 
tone of the passage? 
IV. Complete the sentence by filling in the blank with a suitable phrase. 
The primary theme highlighted in the extract is the _______ , as the narrator reflects 
on her mother’s frailty and aging. 
V. What can be inferred about the emotional state of the speaker in the extract? 
a) Distracted by the liveliness of the surroundings 
b) Concerned about her mother’s discomfort 
c) Overwhelmed by a sense of anguish  
d) Preoccupied with thoughts about life experiences 
VI. All of the following are true for the extract EXCEPT – 
a) The comparison to a ‘corpse’ highlights the speaker’s fear of losing her mother. 
b) The poet makes exclusive use of melancholic imagery in the given lines. 
c) 
The speaker’s internal conflict creates a relatable portrayal of human 
relationships. 
d) The universality of themes makes the lines relevant to the readers. 
OR  
B 
When Aunt is dead, her terrified hands will lie  
Still ringed with ordeals she was mastered by.  
The tigers in the panel that she made  
Will go on prancing, proud and unafraid                                                  
I 
II 
III 
What does the phrase ‘terrified hands’ suggest about Aunt’s life? 
Complete the following suitably. 
The tigers’ proud and playful movements reflect ______.  
Examine briefly how the tigers in the panel contrast with Aunt’s life experiences. 
IV. Fill in the blank with the correct option from those given in the brackets. 
The phrase ‘still ringed’ refers to both the literal ______ (shape of the embroidery 
panel / wedding band on her finger) and the figurative ‘ring’ of constraints and 
ordeals imposed by her marriage. 
9 
Please note that the assessment scheme of the Academic Session 2024-25 will continue 
in the current session i.e. 2025-26 
1 
1 
1  
(Aunt Jennifer’s Tigers) 
1  
1 
1  
1 
10 
Please note that the assessment scheme of the Academic Session 2024-25 will continue 
in the current session i.e. 2025-26 
 
V. If a student were to interpret the word ‘prancing’ in a real-world context, which of the 
following would it best represent? 
 
a) An employee working under the pressure of deadlines. 
b) A soldier standing firm and ready for battle at the frontier. 
c) A child playing freely in a park, unburdened by responsibilities. 
d) A bird trapped in a cage, longing to be free and fly high. 
 
1 
 
VI. What does the poet imply about the art in the line ‘The tigers in the panel that she 
made will go on prancing’? 
 
a) Art is a timeless expression that outlives its creator, continuing to embody their 
spirit and desires. 
b) The tigers symbolise Aunt Jennifer’s fleeting empowerment, which will fade over 
time. 
c) The panel is a temporary escape for Aunt Jennifer, offering solace only during her 
lifetime. 
d) The permanence of the tigers in the panel contrasts with the transient nature of 
Aunt Jennifer’s struggles. 
 
1  
 
8. Read the following extracts and solve ANY ONE of the given two, (A) or (B).                    
                
4x1=4 
A.  My three hundred dollars bought less than two hundred in old-style bills, but I didn’t care; eggs 
were thirteen cents a dozen in 1894. 
But I’ve never again found the corridor that leads to the third level at Grand Central Station, 
although I’ve tried often enough. Louisa was pretty worried when I told her all this, and didn’t 
want me to look for the third level any more, and after a while I stopped; I went back to my 
stamps. But now we’re both looking, every weekend…  
                                                                                                                            (The Third Level) 
I. 
 
What does Charley’s indifference to the cost of old-style bills and his focus on the 
price of eggs in 1894 suggest about his view of the past? 
      1  
II. Complete the sentence suitably. 
Charley has been unsuccessful in finding the corridor to the third level despite ____. 
      1  
III. Where is the irony in Louisa’s reaction to Charley’s search for the third level in this 
extract? 
1 
  
IV. 
 
 
Complete the following with a correct option based on the context in the extract. 
The phrase ‘I went back to my stamps’ suggests _____. 
a)  finding comfort in a hobby that is familiar 
b)  choosing a new hobby to forget earlier pursuits 
c)  attempting to engage together in a new hobby 
d)  approaching a familiar hobby with enthusiasm 
1  
 
11 
Please note that the assessment scheme of the Academic Session 2024-25 will continue 
in the current session i.e. 2025-26 
 
 OR  
B. Derry: What they think. 
Mr Lamb: What do they think, then? 
Derry: You think.... ‘Here’s a boy.’ You look at me...and then you see my face and you think. 
‘That’s bad. That’s a terrible thing. That’s the ugliest thing I ever saw.’ You think, ‘Poor boy.’ But 
I’m not. Not poor. Underneath, you are afraid. Anybody would be. I am. When I look in the 
mirror, and see it, I’m afraid of me. 
Mr Lamb: No, Not the whole of you. Not of you. 
Derry: Yes! 
[Pause]                                                                                                              (On the Face of It) 
I. What does Mr. Lamb mean when he says, “No. Not the whole of you. Not of you”? 1  
II. What might Derry be thinking during the pause after he insists, “Yes!”? 
Choose the most appropriate option: 
A.  "Why doesn’t he understand me?" 
B. "He’s pretending to care like everyone else." 
C. "Maybe he really sees more than just my face." 
D. "I should leave. He doesn’t get it." 
1 
 
III. Fill in the blank with a suitable word: 
Mr. Lamb’s response suggests that he sees Derry’s face as only one ______ of who 
he is. 
 
1  
IV. What does this exchange reveal about the emotional distance Derry feels and Mr. 
Lamb’s attempt to bridge it? 
1 
9. Read the following extracts and solve ANY ONE of the given two, (A) or (B). 1x6=6 
A. She said this in such a friendly manner that the rattrap peddler must have felt confidence in 
her.  
‘It would never have occurred to me that you would bother with me yourself, miss,’ he said. ‘I 
will come at once.’  
He accepted the fur coat, which the valet handed him with a deep bow, threw it over his rags, 
and followed the young lady out to the carriage, without granting the astonished blacksmiths so 
much as a glance.  
But while he was riding up to the manor house he had evil forebodings. 
“Why the devil did I take that fellow’s money?” he thought. “Now I am sitting in the trap and will 
never get out of it.”                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                 (The Rattrap) 
1  
I. 
II. 
III. 
Which of the following best reflect the 'friendly manner' Edla exhibits toward the 
rattrap peddler as referred to in the extract? 
1. Pay a compliment 
2. Show kindness 
3. Provide financial support 
4. Be respectful 
5. Speak in an excited tone 
Select the most suitable option. 
A. 1 and 5 
B. 2 and 4 
C. 1, 2 and 3 
D. 3, 4 and 5 
Fill in the blank with a correct option from those given in the brackets, based on the 
information in the extract. 
The peddler threw the fur coat over his rags and followed Edla out to the carriage, 
______ (enthusiastically / silently / reluctantly). 
How did the peddler feel toward Edla after accepting the fur coat and making his 
statement? 
A. He decided to humour her gesture. 
B. He felt obligated to trust her kindness. 
C. He remained unsure about her true intentions. 
D. He recognised and appreciated her compassion. 
IV. What might have been the most likely reason the blacksmiths were astonished when 
the peddler accepted the coat and left with Edla? 
V. Justify that guilt was the primary cause of the peddler's sense of evil foreboding, 
based on the information in the extract? 
VI. Complete the following suitably. 
When the peddler says, "…I will never get out," his statement stems from his guilt 
over stealing ‘that fellow’s’ money and his fear that _______ . 
OR  
12 
Please note that the assessment scheme of the Academic Session 2024-25 will continue 
in the current session i.e. 2025-26 
1  
1 
1  
1  
1 
13 
Please note that the assessment scheme of the Academic Session 2024-25 will continue 
in the current session i.e. 2025-26 
 
B. “She thinks money grows on trees, don’t she, Dad?”, said little Derek, hanging on 
the back of his father’s chair.  
Their mother sighed. Sophie watched her back stooped over the sink and wondered 
at the incongruity of the delicate bow which fastened her apron strings. The delicate
seeming bow and the crooked back.  
The evening had already blacked in the windows and the small room was steamy 
from the stove and cluttered with the heavy-breathing man in his vest at the table 
and the dirty washing piled up in the corner. Sophie felt a tightening in her throat. 
She went to look for her brother Geoff.   
                                                                                                              (Going Places) 
 
 
I. Fill in the blank by choosing the correct option from those given in the brackets. 
The literal meaning conveyed via the phrase ‘the evening had already blacked in the 
windows’ is the_______ (arrival of night / shadow over ambitions).  
1    
II.  What was mother most likely thinking when she sighed? 
1. "Life would have been different if money did grow on trees!" 
2. "I wish he would stop troubling my dear Sophie." 
3. "We can only wish; we’ve never had enough anyway." 
4. "I’m too tired to respond to such comments anymore." 
5. "Our struggles will never end; no matter what Sophie dreams of." 
 
Select the most suitable option. 
 
A. 1, 3 and 5 
B. 2, 4 and 5 
C. 1 and 4 
D. 2 and 3 
1 
   
III. 
 
 
 
The delicate bow on Sophie’s mother’s apron and her crooked back highlights the 
theme of ______. 
  
A. appearance vs. reality 
B. resilience through hardship 
C. the fragility of youth 
D. the complexity of familial love 
 
1  
IV. The line from the extract that correctly captures Sophie’s emotional response to the 
contrast between her dreams and the limitations of her current circumstances is 
‘________.’ 
1   
V. What does the writer emphasise by associating the term ‘cluttered’  with ‘heavy 
breathing’? 
1 
 
VI. How does the setting of the room contribute to the mood of the extract? 1  
14 
Please note that the assessment scheme of the Academic Session 2024-25 will continue 
in the current session i.e. 2025-26 
 
10. Answer any five of the following six questions in 40 50 words each : 5x2=10 
I. What role does the French language played in ‘The Last Lesson’, in the context of 
the narrator’s feelings towards it? 
2  
II. What lesson can individuals learn from Douglas’s experience in overcoming his fear 
of water?                                                                                                 (Deep Water) 
2  
 
III. Based on what Keats’ suggests in ‘A Thing of Beauty,’ how can recognising the 
lasting value of beauty help someone in the real world cope with challenges or 
difficulties? 
2 
 
IV. What does the reference to fishermen not harming whales and the man gathering 
salt looking at his hurt hands signify in the poem?                             
                                                                                                           (Keeping Quiet) 
2 
 
V. How does Rudyard Kipling's refusal to be interviewed point towards the intrusive and 
unwelcome nature of interviews?                        
                                                                                                     (The Interview I & II) 
2 
 
VI What is the significance of a narrator in ‘Lost Spring’ as opposed to a plain 
narrative? 
2  
11. Answer any two of the following three questions in 40 -50 words each : 2x2=4 
I. 
 
How can participating in educational programmes like ‘Students on Ice’, which take 
students to places like Antarctica, help raise awareness about the impact of 
geological changes and environmental issues?  
                                                                                 (Journey to the End of the Earth) 
 
2 
  
II. What does Zitkala-Sa’s description of being ‘tossed about in the air like a wooden 
puppet’ reveal about her feelings of powerlessness and cultural displacement? 
                                       (The Memories of Childhood: The Cutting of My Long Hair) 
 
2 
 
III. What does Derry’s remark, “Think, you might have been blinded, or born deaf, or 
have to live in a wheelchair...,” reveal about his perspective on how people console 
others? 
                                                                                                         (On the Face of It) 
 
2 
  
12. Answer any one of the following two questions, in about 120-150 words. 1x5=5 
A How do ‘Indigo’ by Louis Fischer and ‘The Roadside Stand’ by Robert Frost, 
highlight the theme of exploitation, and what similarities do they reveal about the 
plight of marginalised communities? 
     
     
    
 OR 
B How can the character of the office boy in ‘Poets and Pancakes,’ who harbours 
dreams, be compared to Sophie from ‘Going Places,’ who is quite aspirational? 
Consider their ambitions and the obstacles they face in their respective 
environments. 
1x5=5 
13. 
Answer any one of the following two questions, in about 120-150 words 
A Justify how Sadao's character arc is more central to the moral dilemma in the  
‘The Enemy’ as opposed to Hana’s.     
OR 
B Analyse how the narrative technique used in ‘The Tiger King’, enhances the impact 
of the story on the reader.  